# Using Tools in Natural Language Processing to Analyze the Motivations, Attitudes, and Perceptions of Prescription Stimulant Users on Reddit

## Summary

As the only major controlled drug with increasing prescription rates in 2023, the rising popularity of stimulants like Adderall continues to spark debate over appropriate uses and long-term effects in adults (Jetson, 2023). To understand the impact of rising stimulant prescriptions from the perspective of users, I choose to extract and analyze posts from the subreddit r/adderall, a Reddit page dedicated to the discussion of ADHD drugs for recreational and medical use. Specifically, 6,417 relevant posts along with 13 associated features (including the overall sentiment of each post and user-derived tags) were collected from the subreddit to better understand user perspectives on medical and non-medical uses of stimulants and their perceived effects. In conducting exploratory and descriptive analysis on post features, general topics of discussion such as Medications, Questions, Co-Use, Harm Reduction, Healthcare, and Personal Experiences were identified. Relationships between features were also interrogated, with one example being an increase in negative relative to positive post sentiment during recent years. Using a topic modeling technique that leveraged embedding models and c-TF-IDF known as BERTopic, 61 additional topics were extracted from the text. These topics were more specific and contained information on physical side effects, psychological side effects, harm reduction strategies, stimulant alternatives, and personal stories detailing experiences such as barriers in accessibility or using stimulants to enhance productivity. The extracted BERTopic categories, user-derived Flair tags, and post sentiment findings were complimentary and aligned well with related literature. This approach helped to identify unmet needs surrounding prescription stimulant use, including the desire for information on ways to holistically manage ADHD symptoms rather than relying solely on pharmacological treatments like Adderall. With this NLP-based approach, we can begin to disambiguate controversies in current adult ADHD research, diagnosis, and clinical care to guide safe and appropriate prescribing practices.

<details>

<summary>Tips for collapsed sections</summary>

## Introduction

With the capacity to stimulate the central nervous system and cause excitation, elevated mood, and increased alertness, prescription stimulant use is expanding. While prescription stimulants can be used to enhance cognitive performance, suppress appetite for weight loss, or alleviate conditions like Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and narcolepsy, they also have the potential for non-medical use and abuse (Favrod-Coune, 2010). The rise of prescription stimulants for non-medical use is particularly apparent in college settings, where 61.7% report diverting their stimulant prescriptions and 36% believe stimulants like Adderall, are “not harmful” and can “make them smarter” (DeSantis, 2010). Though these accounts along with rising prescription rates have raised some alarm in the wake of a devastating opioid crisis, a protracted controversy surrounding the use and impact of these stimulants remains. On the other side of this debate, studies point to the high efficacy of stimulants when prescribed properly and interpret the rise in prescription rates as correcting for the underdiagnosis of conditions like ADHD (Abdelnour, 2022). Regardless of which interpretation is accurate, it is clear that prescription stimulant use is on the rise, increasing by 70% between 2011 and 2021 (Kim, 2023). 
	To better understand the impact of this rise, information from medical and non-medical users of stimulants is essential. However, since many are reluctant to divulge accounts of non-medical stimulant use due to stigma and legality issues, this kind of data is increasingly difficult to obtain. With surveys reporting the number of non-medical stimulant users on college campuses to be anywhere from 5% to 35%, alternative data sources are needed to help narrow this wide interval (Robitaille, 2018). As a quasi-anonymous and supportive space for users to divulge personal struggles or socially stigmatized experiences, social media sites like Reddit provide one possible solution to this data problem. With a 44% growth since 2020, Reddit has over 52 million daily active users, making it the 9th most popular social media app in the US with over 25% of US adults using the site (Dean, 2023). Reddit’s popularity is due in part to its subreddit structure which allows users to create separate groups known as subreddits based on shared interest or experience. The subreddit “r/adderall” was created on April 3, 2010, and is described as “a subreddit dedicated to discussing ADHD drugs for both recreational and medical uses” (Reddit Metrics, 2018). The explicit reference to both “recreational and medical use” combined with encouragement to post authentic and personally relevant experiences with stimulants provides a rich setting for the collection of insightful data. Furthermore, r/adderall has experienced a huge surge in membership since its creation which parallels the growing rate of stimulant use, rising from 14,960 in 2015 to 115,953 in 2023 (Robitaille, 2018). The personal and largely candid perspectives that posts from this subreddit provide make it an ideal source of information from which to investigate the different perspectives of stimulant users as well as their overall attitude and perception of effects. 
	With the rise of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools, it is also becoming increasingly possible to extract themes, patterns, and sentiment from large corpora of text in relatively short periods of time. While transformer embeddings and clustering algorithms allow for the unsupervised extraction of relevant topics from unstructured text, tools like Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner (VADAR) and Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) provide insight into the sentiment associated with each phrase or overall topic. Using NLP tools to uncover major themes, patterns, and sentiments from user activity in the r/adderall subreddit, firsthand perspectives on stimulant use and effects can be extracted to reveal novel insights. In identifying themes and associated sentiments surrounding medical and non-medical use of prescription stimulants, a more comprehensive picture of stimulant use can be created to inform next steps and identify areas requiring further investigation.
Evidence-Based Practice Review
History of Prescription Stimulants & Uses
When looking at the most common medical use cases for prescription stimulants, a study done by the Washington State Department of Health found that nearly 90% of all FDA-approved prescriptions (dispensed from 2012-2022) were used for ADHD treatment. Other medical uses, which together made up around 10% of cases, included sleep-wake disorders like narcolepsy and weight loss (Jetson, 2023). To understand how prescription stimulants became so commonly linked with ADHD, I conducted a brief literature search on reviews examining the history of prescription stimulants in conjunction with ADHD. In the early 1900s, most people did not accept ADHD as an actual disorder, claiming instead that it was an “abnormal defect” of moral control that described “high-grade feeble-minded” children (Martinez-Badia, 2015). However, in 1937, Charles Bradley accidentally discovered the potential use of Benzedrine (one of the first synthesized amphetamine stimulants) upon noticing that, rather than helping with this initial goal to alleviate headaches, it helped children instead with behavior and school performance (Bradley, 1937). Although ADHD was not recognized yet as a disorder (known then as “hyperkinetic impulsivity”), this finding set off the first wave of interest in stimulants, beginning with Adderall’s synthesis in 1960 and continuing with the discovery of Ritalin (the first methylphenidate stimulant) for “emotionally disturbed children” in 1963 (Conners, 1963). In response to the rising popularity of stimulants and their efficacy in alleviating ADHD symptoms, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) partially recognized ADHD for the first time as “disorders of hyperkinetic reaction of childhood or adolescence and organic brain syndrome” (2nd ed.; DSM–II; American Psychiatric Association, 1968). This acknowledgment would spark some of the first controversy around stimulants for the treatment of ADHD, with reports of heavily medicated school children invoking a worried skepticism that culminated in the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1971, making stimulants like Ritalin and Adderall Schedule II drugs (Gabay, 2013). As the battle between skeptics and advocates continued, treatment for ADHD has become more and more widespread, although an updated American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) cautioned that prescription stimulants should be combined “with appropriate management of a child’s environment and curriculum” (Colson, 1997). Since then, several popular prescription stimulants have risen in popularity and are described in more detail in Table 1. 

</details>
